ECOLOGICAL METAPHORS IN PHYSICS:
THE VACUUM AS SOIL, PART 1

One of the most peculiar and elusive concepts in physics is that of the vacuum.

When I was in high school, my physics teacher told me that the `vacuum' meant empty space. It was simply space with nothing occupying it. By that stage in our education we had learned that air is made of molecules. The teacher had a sealed glass jar and a pump that would pump most of the air out of it. The teacher asked us: if the pump were strong enough to remove every single molecule of air from the jar, what would be left inside? The answer, he said, is empty space, which is called vacuum.

Pondering this after the class, I hit upon what seemed to me an inscrutible paradox. Take two objects, say two chairs or (using your imagination) two atoms, and declare that `there is nothing between them'. What else can this statement mean, except that the two are touching one another? But if so, it means there is not even space between them. So, empty space is not nothing. What we call "vacuum" is not the same as "nothing at all". But if there are no atoms in it, then what is it made of? If the vacuum is not nothing, then what kind of thing is it?

You might expect that if a child, wondering these things, had gone on to study physics at university, then to write a PhD on physics and become a professional career physicist for years, that eventually they would arrive at a good answer. Well, I did all of those things, and the best answer I can come up with is not really an answer -- at least not the kind of answer that counts as a rigorous scientific answer -- but only a metaphor. 

The vacuum is like soil. It is the soil of the universe.

When we think of soil, if we do so at all, we tend to think of it either as something horrible and disgusting that is made from rotting and decaying plants and animals, or else we think of it as something wonderful, fertile, dark and mysterious that has an almost magical power to rejuvenate old life and produce new life. The paradox of soil is the way that it embodies and synthesizes death and decay on one hand, with life and growth on the other hand. As Walt Whitman puts it:

"
A child said What is the grass? fetching it to me with full hands;
  How could I answer the child? I do not know what it is any more than he.

  I guess it must be the flag of my disposition, out of hopeful green
      stuff woven.

  Or I guess it is the handkerchief of the Lord,
  A scented gift and remembrancer designedly dropt,
  Bearing the owner’s name someway in the corners, that we may see
      and remark, and say Whose?

  Or I guess the grass is itself a child, the produced babe of the vegetation.

  Or I guess it is a uniform hieroglyphic,
  And it means, Sprouting alike in broad zones and narrow zones,
  Growing among black folks as among white,
  Kanuck, Tuckahoe, Congressman, Cuff, I give them the same, I
      receive them the same.

  And now it seems to me the beautiful uncut hair of graves.

  Tenderly will I use you curling grass,
  It may be you transpire from the breasts of young men,
  It may be if I had known them I would have loved them,
  It may be you are from old people, or from offspring taken soon out
      of their mothers’ laps,
  And here you are the mothers’ laps.

  This grass is very dark to be from the white heads of old mothers,
  Darker than the colorless beards of old men,
  Dark to come from under the faint red roofs of mouths.

  O I perceive after all so many uttering tongues,
  And I perceive they do not come from the roofs of mouths for nothing.

  I wish I could translate the hints about the dead young men and women,
  And the hints about old men and mothers, and the offspring taken
      soon out of their laps.

  What do you think has become of the young and old men?
  And what do you think has become of the women and children?

  They are alive and well somewhere,
  The smallest sprout shows there is really no death,
  And if ever there was it led forward life, and does not wait at the
      end to arrest it,
  And ceas’d the moment life appear’d.

  All goes onward and outward, nothing collapses,
  And to die is different from what any one supposed, and luckier.
"

When I was taught that the vacuum is empty space, it seemed to me that it must be a barren, like a desert. A desert is a place that is dry, and therefore it is also empty of life. Antarctica is the Earth's biggest desert, which by being so cold is also dry, because all water is frozen and cannot sustain life in that form. Bigger still is the desert of interstellar space, an environment that is nearly a true vacuum. To enter this vast emptiness means to have the life sucked from your dessicated body in mere seconds. 

The idea of empty space, as familiar as it is today, was not always so natural or obvious. The argument that I was able to articulate event as a schoolboy, that empty space must be different from `nothing at all', was the basis for more sophisticated arguments by pholosophers since antiquity, who insisted that there could be no such thing as a true void. Aristotle was one of the first strident proponents of this idea, which was perpetuated for centuries afterwards by the medieval scholastics. After the Renaissance, various prominent thinkers including Descartes, Galileo, and Mach would give their own personal twist to the idea. For Descartes, the concept of `spatial extension' was synonymous with matter -- there could be no notion of space except as embodied by some material substance. Furthermore, an influence of one material body on another could only be achieved through a chain of intermediate material influences, like a row of dominoes toppling one another. All natural forces had to be reducible to a chain of physical impacts of material bodies placed side-by-side with no space in between. The notion that a force could be transmitted over truly empty space was absurd. 

For these thinkers, therefore, space could not be empty at all -- it had to be full of some kind of matter. Even if this matter was only a very thinly distributed and invisible, it had to be there in order to explain how apparently empty space could have extension, and to explain how long-distance forces could be transmitted across it.

Newton was the one who really upset this orthodoxy with his universal theory of gravitation. According to Newton, not did space exist absoulutely and independently of matter, but the gravitational force was a force that could act instantaneously between two bodies across empty space. This was an absolute shock to thinkers at the time, and created much controvery. Newton was accused of introducing `occult forces' into physics, bringing science backwards to the middle ages. Even Newton himself displayed some discomfort with the idea in his private correspondence. 

Newton's vision of empty space was not equivalent to `nothingness', for space had a definite existence. In Newton's paradigm space was a kind of container, or stage, in which matter existed and moved. Just like a stage in a theater, it exists mainly for the actors to deliver their performance, but once the curtains close and the actors depart, the stage continues to exist apart from them. With Newton, space was deprived of all its material being and became just pure, barren, extension. A true desert.

Einstein, following the lead of Mach, rejected Newton's idea of space and time as absolutes that existed independently of any material references. In his special and general theories of relativity, he dismantled much of the Newtonian paradigm. So devastating were the changes wrought by relativity that Einstein felt the need to apologize to Newton in his autobiographical notes:
"Newton, forgive me. You found the only way which in your age was just barely possible for a man with the highest powers of thought and creativity. The concepts which you created are guiding our thinking in physics even today..."
Despite the radical shift in our view of empty space (which Einstein combined with time into space-time), there was one aspect of Newton's vision of empty space that seemed to remain: the vacuum. Shortly after Einstein published his theory, it was discovered that the theory allowed an empty universe to exist in principle: that is, it allowed space-time to exist without any matter in it. This was something of a surprise, given that it contradicted the thinking of Mach, whose ideas had been a significant influence on Einstein's thinking. It seemed that even the scale of Einstein's revolution was not enough to overthrow Newton's idea of empty space as being truly empty.

Or was it?

There are some peculiarities about empty space in general relativity, which give us a hint that the vacuum is, perhaps, not quite empty. The first of these hints was the fact that Einstein's theory allowed space-time to curve (something that was unthinkable to Newton), and this curvature is what we now understand to be gravity itself. Gravity is not a force at all: it is a shape, the shape of space-time. But this meant that the "container" of space-time, even if it was completely empty of matter, was no longer a passive container with rigid walls, but now became more like a soft bag, whose wobbly walls could carry waves. For a long time scientists argued about whether these waves had any physical meaning, but eventually it was discovered that these waves carry energy and momentum, just like material waves. This prediction was dramatically confirmed recently with the detection of gravitational waves by LIGO. This means that even empty space-time must contain energy.

What is this energy? At this stage things become very mysterious. In general relativity, there is no way to cleanly separate the idea of `energy' from the idea of `space-time geometry'. The reason is that energy is something that has to be conserved in time, and so in order for it to be well-defined, we need to have a unique notion of time. But we only have a unique notion of time in a few special cases where space-time allow themselves to be cleanly separated into layers. In general, this is not possible -- space and time become all mixed up together, and so there is no cleanly separable notion of time that we can use to define energy conservation. Think of it like a jar of oil and water. If it is relatively calm, maybe with just a few wobbles, the water and oil stay in separate layers, and we can skim the oil off the top. This is what a globally hyperbolic space-time is like, where we can cleanly separate energy from space-time geometry. Now shake up the jar until the oil and water are all tangled up with each other, flying around in blobs. There is no way to skim the oil off and leave just the water behind. This is like a general space-time, where we cannot cleanly separate energy from space-time geometry.

Okay, so the vacuum contains energy -- but energy is not the same thing as matter, right? That is half-true. In relativity theory, energy and mass are interconvertible. That means that when energy is "bound", such as when it is confined to a small volume, like in a compressed spring or a container of gas, it looks just liek mass from the outside, and curves space and time just the way mass does. Amazing as it might seem, if you compress a spring, its total mass increases by a tiny amount, because the the extra potential energy contributes to the overall mass of the spring. Similarly when you heat up the gas in a container, you are increasing the speed of the gas molecules inside, and this extra kinetic energy contributes to the overall mass of the gas. So what looks like mass on the outside often turns out to be mostly just the potential and kinetic energy of the parts. If you add up the masses of all the fundamental particles in your body, it would only amount to an infinitesimal fraction of your actual mass -- the majority of your mass is actually due to the potential energy of the particles bound up inside you. Of course, the trouble with the energy of the vacuum is that it is not bound-up in any spatial volume -- it is moving around and travelling freely. So whether or not we can think of the curvature of empty space as having its own mass becomes a rather tricky question, which is still a topic of lively debate in some circles. 

There is one more curiosity about Einstein's vacuum. Strictly speaking, points in space-time do not have physical meaning unless they co-incide with some in-principle observable physical event, such as the crossing of paths of two particle trajectories. This presents a certain conceptual difficulty if we wish to think of space-time as a continuous physical thing, because that would imply that there is something observable happening at every single point in space-time, and yet we know that space is mostly empty of particles. The solution is not to think of the points of space-time as referring to events that actually occur, but rather to think of them as abstract place-holders for events that might occur. There is a handy mental construction for doing this: if we want to give physical meaning to some space-time point, we imagine two hypothetical point-like particles of negligible mass whose trajectories happen to cross that that point. We call these "test particles". Since they are purely hypothetical, we can imagine they might exist at any point at all, and so the notion of a continuous space-time manifold acquires its physical meaning from the test particles that might exist in it (but don't have to actually exist)! In a sense, the vacuum of general relativity is not only full of energy, but also full of possibility: every point necessarily represents a possible meeting of material particles. These `possible meetings' seem to have an existence of their own, as a kind of potential existence, waiting to be fulfilled, just in those cases when we actually observe an event at that point.

So the vacuum in general relativity may or may not be truly empty, but it has energy and possibilities in it, and so it is a much more dynamic and exciting kind of vacuum than it was in Newton's paradigm.

In the next post, I'll talk about how things get even stranger when we add quantum mechanics to the mix.






