ECOLOGICAL METAPHORS IN PHYSICS:
THE VACUUM AS SOIL, PART 2

In a previous post, I explained how Newton overthrew the orthodox idea of his time, which had survived since antiquity, that there could be no such thing as truly empty space. I then explained how modern physics, specifically Einstein's theory of general relativity, has given us a reason to question whether Newton was right about the vacuum: can it truly be empty of all matter? We saw that in general relativity the vacuum can carry waves and therefore also energy, and that this energy at least has the potential to represent matter. However, the process whereby energy could become matter remains mysterious.

The final twist to this story comes from quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics, it is often said, is not really a theory in itself but a set of abstract principles for constructing theories (indeed we could say the same thing about relativity). As of today, physicists have succeeded in constructing a quantum theory of every known type of matter: light, atoms, electricity, the individual parts atoms (protons and neutrons), and every fundamental particle known to exist. The quantum theory of all of these is known as the Standard Model of particle physics. There is only one thing left that we have not yet succeeded in applying quantum theory to, and that is space-time itself. For the moment, our best picture of space-time is still the one that Einstein gave us, which is kind of like a malleable, wobbly container in which matter exists.

But what happens when the matter inside the `container' of space-time is quantum matter? We can think of space-time in general relativity as being like a still pond, and matter as things like rocks and fish that we can throw into the pond. Before quantum mechanics, having matter in space-time was just like throwing a rock into the pond: it would create a splash and some ripples, and the rock would sink in and remain there, perhaps being moved around by currents. Matter acts on space-time, and space-time acts on matter, but the two remain separate from each other, just like the rock remains solid and keeps its shape in the water. Adding quantum matter to space-time is like dropping one of those vitamin tablets into the pond: as soon as it enters the water is starts fizzing and bubbling, dissolving into the surrounding water, until you don't know where the tablet ends and the water begins. 

The first sign of trouble came when Paul Dirac discovered his famous equation that tells us how to apply quantum mechanics to an electron in space-time. Now remember, Dirac only applied quantum mechanics to the electron itself -- he did not apply it to space-time (nobody has managed that). Still, this was a huge advance for the time. But more importantly, it seemed to reveal something rather disturbing about the vacuum.

According to Dirac's theory, electrons could have positive or negative energy. Generally in physics energy is always positive -- it can never be negative. In classical physics before quantum mechanics, we usually begin by assuming that all matter has positive energy, and then we prove that all physical processes must keep the energy positive, so it never becomes negative. However, Dirac noticed that even if we assume that all electrons have positive energy to begin with, it would be possible for an electron to emit light, by a perfectly ordinary physical process, and therefore to lose energy until eventually its energy would become negative. But we know that cannot be true, since it would mean that the electrons of every atom in the universe would spiral downwards into the nucleus, and all matter would implode inwards on itself like a collapsing house of cards. 

In a desperate leap of imagination to save his theory, Dirac relied upon an idea that had been suggested by the physicist Wolfgang Pauli, called the `exclusion principle'. Pauli's exclusion principle said that no two electrons could occupy the same place in space, and have the same properties at the same time. Dirac realized that if empty space were actually completely filled with negative energy electrons, then it would not be possible for any positive energy electron to become a negative energy electron. Since all the negative energy `parking spots' are used up, there would be nowhere for it to go -- so it would have to just remain in the lowest positive energy state. In this way, Dirac's theory was, at least for a short time in history, able to allow the existence of negative energy matter while explaining why matter did not collapse in on itself. 

However, the idea of a so-called `Dirac sea' of negative energy electrons was not widely accepted, and still had a lot of problems, not least of which was the supposed existence of matter with negative energy, an idea that still struck many physicists as absurd. The way beyond Dirac's `sea' came from an interesting quirk in Dirac's own theory. According to it, there could sometimes occur a `hole' in the sea of negative energy electrons, which would behave just like a positive energy electron with opposite charge (that is, with positive instead of negative charge). At the time, no such particles were know to exist, but then in 1932 physicist Carl Anderson observed particle tracks in his cloud chamber that exactly fitted this description. Anderson discovered these tracks quite by accident, while he was looking for something else (cosmic rays), and was not familiar with Dirac's "hole theory" and so had no idea what he had just seen. Many people at the time assumed that the particle Anderson had detected (named the `positron') was in fact not a particle but a "hole" in Dirac's sea of negative electrons.   

This view shifted with the seminal work of Pauli and Weisskopf in 1934. They were dissatified with Dirac's model for a number of reasons. One big reason was that Dirac's trick only worked for particles that obeyed Pauli's exclusion principle, such as electrons. But particles of light, called photons, did not obey the exclusion principle. This meant that the problem of negative energy particles could not be solved for photons -- even if there was a sea of negative energy photons, nothing would not prevent positive energy photons from falling into it. So Pauli and Weisskopf set out to re-build the quantum theory of photons and electrons from scratch, and to do it in a way that would get rid of the negative energy particles for good. They succeeded in their task, and the result was the first example of what today we would call a `quantum field theory'.

To pull it off, Pauli and Weisskopf made an ingenious innovation. When thinking of his quantum model of the electron, Dirac had been contemplating just a single electron in space-time. Therefore, in Dirac's model, the number of electrons remained constant and was effectively not treated as a quantum parameter. What Pauli and Weisskopf realized is that the number of particles itself had to be treated as a quantum variable, which could fluctuate dynamically. At that time, quantum theories were constructed by first formulating a classical mechanical theory, and then performing a `quantization procedure' on it, which would turn it into a quantum theory. Whereas Dirac took the classical theory of a single point-like electron as the starting point for his quantum model, Pauli and Weisskopf took the classical theory of a matter field as their starting point. After quantizing it, they found that they no longer had a single particle described by a wavefunction, but rather a quantum field which could have any positive number of particles associated to it. Seemingly miraculously, this theory had a state of minimum possible energy, namely, the state of the quantum field in which there were zero particles; they called this the `vacuum state'. 

By simply assuming that the energy of the vacuum state is itself above zero, then we can guarantee that there will be no negative energy particles. Because the vacuum state is the state of lowest possible energy, it just isn't possible for any particle to drop below that.

But what about the positron? If it is not a hole in the Dirac sea, then what could it be? According to quantum field theory, for every field of charged particles, such as the negatively charged electron field, there has to exist another kind of matter field whose properties are identical but whose charge is opposite. Thus every charged particle would imply the existence of an "anti-particle" of opposite charge. And if the two ever meet, they annihilate one another in a shower of pure energy. The positron is therefore not merely the absence of an electron: it is a real particle in its own right, with positive energy, which is the anti-particle of the electron.

Surprisingly, getting rid of the Dirac sea did not help to `tame' the vacuum. Quite the opposite: as quantum field theory continued to be developed over the subsequent decades, and applied to more and more matter fields, the meaning of the vacuum became more mysterious. To understand why, we need to delve a little deeper into the mechanics of quantum fields.

If you have a matter field in space-time, and you want to quantize it, the first thing you have to do is break it up into small mathematical pieces. In flat space-time (eg. little or no influence of gravity) it turns out that these pieces can be neatly separated into two groups, called the `positive frequency' and the `negative frequency' components of the field. When we quantize the field, the positive frequency bits become the electrons, and the negative frequency bits become positrons. Mathematically, every field has to have both types of components, so that is why every particle has to have an anti-particle.

Now, this procedure is great when it works, but it has two basic limitations. The first is that, since we don't quantize space-time itself, the theory doesn't actually tell us what the energy of the vacuum state is. From astronomical observations of the rate of the universe's expansion, we have experimental evidence that the vacuum energy is very very small and positive. However, quantum field theory cannot even predict what its value should be. Basically, quantum field theory only allows us to predict energy differences relative to the vacuum, but the energy of the vacuum itself has to be "put in hand".

The second limitation is that this procedure only works when the space-time is not too curved, specifically when it is "globally hyperbolic" (remember the example of oil and water from the last post). In a general curved space-time background there is mathematically no way to cleanly separate the field's parts into positive and negative frequency components. This is related to the problem mentioned in the previous post, that in curved space-time we can't cleanly separate energy from geometry. So not only can we not quantize space-time itself, we also can't even quantize matter fields if they are in a space-time that is too curved!

This compounds the mystery of the vacuum, because it means that at our current level of understanding, we can't actually say very much about what the vacuum is. Quantum field theory does give us a few hints, though.

The first hint is that we now have an actual mechanism by which particles with actual mass can be converted into (or created out of) pure energy. In general relativity it was ambigious whether vacuum energy could really become mass -- but in quantum field theory it is completely certain. When a particle and antiparticle annihilate, they turn into pure energy, and conversely, it is possible for pure energy to be converted into particle-antiparticle pairs. This is the whole principle of the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, Geneva: by smashing together heavy particles we create so much energy concentrated in a small space that it spontaneously converts into matter. That allows us to see exactly what kinds of particles can possibly exist: we infuse the vacuum with energy and it produces particles like exotic fruits.

This is another hint: the vacuum contains potential particles. In quantum field theory, in order to make calculations, we use a theoretical device called a `perturbation'. The perturbation involves considering hypothetical processes that could take place in principle, in very short periods of time. For instance, an electron-positron pair might be spontaneously created out of the vacuum energy, and then a moment later annihilate back into energy. These so-called `virtual particles' are similar to the test-particles of general relativity, in the sense that they do not necessarily happen: all that matters is that they could happen. What is amazing is that in quantum mechanics, the mere fact that something could happen, can affect the things that do happen. When we calculate perturbations, in order to predict what will be observed, we need to take into account every possible "virtual" process that could happen, because just by being possible, they affect what is actually observed. 

The number of possible types of processes that could possibly happen in the vacuum is infinite. Perturbation theory is a theory of approximation: it classifies these types of processes into a hierarchy of "orders", such that the lowest orders have the biggest impact on our predictions, while higher orders have progressively less significance and also become progressively more complicated. It's a bit like having an infinite to-do list, where by good fortune the most important items are also the simplest ones to do! So far we haven't managed to go beyond order six or thereabouts, but it is enough to make extraodinarily accurate predictions about particle behaviour.

The vacuum of quantum theory has a mysterious energy, whose value we do not yet know how to predict, but whose effects we can see in the way it moves the stars. And the vacuum is teeming with possibilities: if we overload it with extra energy, it spontaneously converts them into real particles, popping out of the vacuum like bean sprouts!

That's the most incredible thing about how we discovered many particles, including the Higg's boson. We didn't just "discover" the Higgs particle in a passive sense, we actively created the conditions that enabled the universe to produce it for us. It's like the difference between discovering different types of trees by going for a walk in the woods, versus discovering trees by fertilizing a patch of ground with compost and seeing what grows out of it. We don't merely observe nature anymore: now we cultivate it. We live in the age of soil.







