THOUGHTS ON LOCALITY 1

One of the most notorious weasel words in physics is "locality". At a conference I once attended, one of the speakers spent five minutes just reviewing the history of different ways that physicists have used "locality", and explaining how he was going to use the word. Later on at the same conference, a professor gave a talk about "tomographic locality". Thinking about the talk and the meaning of these words afterwards, I came to a conclusion that seemed very bizarre. I will try to explain it here so you can see how weasel words get us in trouble.

Roughly speaking, a system is "tomographically local" if you can infer its state by doing independent measurements on its "local parts". So I imagined two particles of different masses floating nearby in an empty universe. I could see how the mass of the total system could be decided by measuring the masses separately and adding them up. It is easy to imagine a device that can measure the mass of a particle locally, even in the absence of gravity. For example, one can impart a known force to the particle and see how much it accelerates, and all of this can be done in the close vicinity of the particle. Furthermore, after measuring the mass of each particle locally in this way, we know that the total mass is obtained by just adding them up. So the mass of the two-particle system is "tomographically local": the parts determine the whole. 

But what about the relative distance between the two particles? Clarly we can imagine a device that measures this distance, by covering the whole distance from one particle to the other. But it seems that for tomographic locality we would need to have some property that could be measured locally, at the site of each particle, and then these values combined would tell us the total distance between them. But this is absurd: there is no locally measurable quantity of a particle that carries information about its relative distance to some other particle. You might say, `what about its position?' Sure, if we could measure the position vector of each particle relative to a third particle used as a reference, we could simply subtract the two to find the vector that gives the relative distance of the two particles. But measuring the position of a particle relative to some reference particle is not a local measurement. You cannot carry your reference particle with you, as you can do with a reference mass -- you have to leave it at its distant location. You can only measure the position using a machine that traverses space, and so a particle in itself has no local property of `position'. It follows that there are no `parts' that can be measured of the two particles that would determine their relative distance. Does this mean that relative distance violates tomographic locality? 

Physicists familiar with these concepts might want to take a moment to see if they can solve the riddle for themselves. Many people I asked at the conference couldn't see the flaw in the argument, but two of them did spot it. Can you?

The trick is in the meaning of "local parts". For "local tomography", the "local parts" are just the different quantities that define the physical system. These quantities need not have anything to do with space and time, and need not themselves be "local" in space. In other words, the word "local" in the phrase "local tomography" is misleading: we are not talking about localization in space! Rather, what we mean by "local parts" is more like "quantities whole values can be measured independently without disturbing one another".

In the example above, the system is defined by three quantities: two masses, and one relative distance. The joint state of these three variables (given as a joint probability of their possible values) can indeed be discovered by doing repeated simultaneous measurements of each quantity individually -- that is, we can deduce the state of the whole two-particle system using two machines that measure mass (and don't measure distances), and one machine that measures relative distance (and doesn't measure mass). That means "local tomography" is satisfied. The critical point is that measuring the mass of one quantity does not affect the expected values of the other quantities -- that is the only sense in which these quantities are "local"!

However, notice that the machine that measures relative distance has to be spread out in space, because it has to be large enough to take both particles as input and measure the distance from one to the other. So the `relative-distance-measuring-machine' is not localized in space-time, it is big and spread out. So when we talk about measuring the "local parts" in "local tomography", we are not talking about parts that are localized in the space-time sense of occupying a single location at a given moment. Instead we are using "local" to mean "specific to some physical quantity", but this quantity might not be local in the space-time sense of the word. 

So the solution is that my example is perfectly compatible with "local tomography" and the confusion was just due to confusing two different meanings connected to the word "local". To avoid confusing them from now on, let's use "space-time locality" to mean "local" in the sense of having a definite location at a definite moment in time. In the case of "tomographic locality", the key point is that the mere act of measuring one quantity (no matter the outcome) does not in itself affect our expectations about measurements on the other quantities. We might call this "non-disturbance locality", since it is suggestive of the idea that interactions with one quantity do not disturb the others.

This raises an interesting question about the connection between these different definitions. Which one of them is more fundamental? 

On one hand, we could assume that space-time exists at a fundamental level, and then ask how measurements that are space-time localized can affect each other. We would then find that, experimentally, any measurements performed in different locations at the same time (more generally, at space-like separation) cannot affect one another -- they also satisfy "non-disturbance locality". On the other hand, this is not true for measurements that are performed at different times but in the same place (more generally, at time-like separation). So by this story, we have discovered that the structure of space-time places an experimental constraint on how measurements in different parts of space-time can affect one another, and this constraint needs to be explained.

On the other hand, we can assume that space-time does not exist at the fundamental level. Instead, we have quantities that can be measured, but for which we cannot say where they are located in space and time. For this strange world, we can only say whether quantities satisfy "non-disturbance locality". But we can now choose to define "space-like separation" as the requirement that two quantities satisfy "non-disturbance locality", and conversely we can define "time-like separation" by the requrement that they do not. Then we can ask: what features must our theory have so that, at large scales, we recover something that looks approximately like a smooth background space-time manifold? 

According to the first story, space-time constrains the matter that moves in it; according to the second story, matter constrains the shape of space-time that emerges from it. Which is right?