Another major point of confusion is that Pragmatists like William James can easily be misinterpreted as saying that our very thoughts and opinions have the power to change world in arbitrary ways. This is akin to a philosophical sin known as "solipsism", which means roughly that you can make anything true if you just wish for it or make yourself believe in it strongly enough. This kind of thinking is very common in self-help books, and is the sworn enemy of all good scientists, QBists included. That's why QBists absolutely hate it when people accuse them of being solipsists. 

The easiest way to avoid this confusion is by keeping a few things firmly in mind. Firstly, just because the QBists insist that things only happen when you experience them (the chair is only real when you're sitting in it), doesn't mean that you get to decide what happens. Things can and do happen differently to how we wanted or expected them to happen. Suppose a car is speeding towards a QBist. Can the QBist escape by covering their eyes and saying: "I can't see it, therefore it is not real, and therefore it can't hurt me?" No, they cannot, because the basic lesson of life (that a QBist knows full-well) is that what you don't know CAN hurt you. The QBists often summarize this lesson in the cryptic phrase "my beliefs have no ontic hold on the world". That just means that, no matter what you believe about the world and how certain you are of something, the world can always trip you up with a surprise. The confusion arises because people keep mistaking QBism as an attempt to represent the world by our beliefs and opinions. That is almost the exact opposite of QBism. QBism is a set of rules for dealing with the uncertainty of the world. It doesn't tell you how the world *is*, it only tells you how to reason consistently in an uncertain world. Seeing a speeding car and not diving out of the way would be incoherent to a QBist. Your actions would not be consistent with your prior beliefs about cars. Now it is true that, if you happened to believe for some reason that cars could not hurt you, then you would be perfectly coherent (according to the QBist) by not diving out of the way. Does this mean that QBism would endorse this behaviour?

The short answer is: yes! If you really, truly believe that a car speeding towards you can't hurt you, then QBism cannot presume to say that you are wrong in not diving out of the way. On the other hand, QBism does not say that your certainty that cars are safe is any guarantee that cars *are* safe. If you are injured or killed by the car, that's just the world disagreeing with your beliefs about cars. The point is that you would never actually believe that you are safe from a speeding car unless you really had no experience whatsoever of cars. We cannot simply choose to believe whatever we like: our minds are geared to make all of our beliefs fit together with our past experiences in a consistent way. Next time you're walking towards a tree, just try to make yourself believe that you'll pass right through it. You will find that, try as you might, you can't really believe it. Why? Because many painful experiences from childhood of running into things and getting a bloody nose have taught you otherwise. To resist the weight of that past experience is to go against the grain of your own mind, to force your current beliefs to be inconsistent with previous beliefs. It goes against our very nature.

The extrapolation to cars is fairly straightforward. But if somebody grew up in a world of holograms, where they seemed to pass through trees and cars as easily as air, could we really fault them for not diving out of the way of a car made of metal and plastic? Could we really say that they were `wrong'? No we could not, says the QBist, anymore than we could say that you are wrong for diving out of the path of a car that later turned out to be just a hologram. We have no access to the world in itself, so we can't be expected to know how things really are, or what the world will throw at us next. All we can do is try to act and think consistently with what we've learned and come to believe based on previous experience. According to QBists the job of science is not (as is usually claimed) to represent the world as it really is -- science is really only about maintaining consistency and coherence within our web of interconnected beliefs and expectations. All scientific statements can be reduced to: "if you believe X, then you ought to believe Y", but cannot ever tell you if you are right or wrong in believing "X" in isolation from your other beliefs. Beyond the network of our beliefs, and often in spite of them, the world always reserves the right to surprise us. That's not so hard to understand, is it?
 