The most frustrating thing about being a QBist

The biggest obstacle that QBists face is that most people just don't get one of its most basic premises. The annoying thing is that, out of everything else you might criticise about QBism, this one premise is arguably the most incontestable part of the whole paradigm.

The premise is this: everything that you know about the world is ultimately based on your own personal experience. 

That's it! Whenever you say something like "this chair is real", or "Sally is joyful", or "the Universe started with the Big Bang", the meaning of those statements must ultimately somehow trace back to things that *you personally* experienced. The chair is real because you bumped into it, and you sat in it. Sally is joyful because she told you so, and you understand English, and you're not a sociopath (To any sociopaths reading this ... I assume you don't feel offended). And the Universe started at the Big Bang because the scientists said so and you trust them (never mind why you trust `em -- that's a topic for another essay).

Really, it seems blindingly self-evident that all claims to knowledge must be predicated on personal experience and somehow deduced from that experience. So it is enormously frustrating for QBists to be asked things like "do you believe other people are real?" or "do you believe anything existed before you were born?" or "don't you agree that the Big Bang happened before any people were around to experience it?". People asking these questions are failing to grasp the fundamental point. When you talk about anything "existing" or "happening" at any time, whatever you mean by that has to be spelled out and unpacked in terms of your personal experiences. Full stop. Even the most hard-core scientific realist would have to admit that. The QBist doesn't necessarily have the answers for how to do that for everything, but QBism is founded on the assumption that it can be done, "somehow".

Think of it like the theory of evolution: pointing to complex organisms and demanding to know how they could possibly have evolved is not in itself a refutation of evolutionary theory. The basic premise of that theory is that such questions are well-posed and can be answered, even if the current state of knowledge can't answer them. So too with QBism. A QBist can't necessarily give you a detailed account of how the objective world that you think of in your day-to-day activities emerges from the fundamental element of your first-person experience. But the QBist considers that an interesting question, and is confident that it has an answer.

Arguably, QBism's insistence on founding all claims to knowledge on first-person subjective experience is the least contestable aspect of their program. Reflecting on your own life should be enough to convince you of that. When did you ever get to experience something from inside someone else's mind? When did you ever experience something that happened when you weren't around to witness it? Never! So why does this cause so much confusion?

One source of confusion is that this view is generally considered by physicists to be philosophical hair-splitting that has no practical relevance for physics. Moreover, it is very strange to think in these terms. Martin Gardner has a wonderful essay titled "Why I Am Not a Pragmatist" in which he explains quite clearly what the difficulty is in accepting this most basic truth of QBism. The answer, in short, is that while it may be stricto-senso correct, it is not at all a natural or convenient way to think, in most cases. A QBist would agree with this; there is a reason for the "Q" in QBism. QBists are quite happy to take for granted an independent and externally existing world for most of your daily affairs. They only endorse the strictly first-person attitude in the specific context of trying to understand quantum systems, for it is there (the QBist argues) that the Pragmatic point of view can clear up all kinds of apparent paradoxes and maybe show the way forward to a better understanding of quantum theory, and therefore the fundamental nature of reality. The QBists only ask that we keep always in the back of our minds that the "independent and externally existing world" that we usually take for granted is ultimately deceptive. At bottom, it must be accounted for by stitching together many subjective views, and when it comes to quantum systems we can't ignore this tedious part of the job: we have to do the accounting of objectivity explicitly. 
