Point 2. ...but it's not there yet.

Exactly because it is an attitude or an approach towards quantum theory, QBism does not begin by supplying answers. Instead, it supplies a methodological framework for posing questions and avoiding wrong answers, and (it is hoped) for finding the right ones eventually. That means that most of its early work is of a purely negative character: explaining why certain quantum paradoxes are not paradoxical, or why certain no-go theorems miss the mark. As time goes by, QBism hopes to reveal something of the nature of quantum mechanics and of reality. This can only happen when more people understand the internal logic of QBism and try to apply it to their own problems. Gradually, as the skeptical acid does its work, we will begin to see a picture emerging of what quantum mechanics is really all about. 

Some fragments of this picture are already showing up. The most prominent is an equation at whose altar the QBists prostrate themselves, hailing it as the "Urgleichung", which is German for something like "the fundamental equation from which all else springs". To your regular Joe of physics, it is actually just a familiar equation of quantum theory called "Born's Rule" that the QBists seem to have written in an obscure way, using probability distributions on both sides of the equation. Normally the Born rule has a probability distribution on the left hand side and some quantum states (think matrices of complex numbers) on the right hand side. Why are the QBists so happy about replacing the complex matrices with probability distributions? Isn't this just mathematical semantics? 

Well, that's a topic for another post. What I want to say here is that the Urgleichung is, for the QBists, a statement that holds independently of your particular subjective beliefs. Unlike traditional `laws of physics', which dictate how the world behaves, the Urgleichung tells you what it means to `be coherent in the world'. The left side of the equation is a probability that describes your own personal expectations about something that could really happen to you. The probabilities on the right hand side are also your expectations about some other things that could happen. And the Urgleichung is the equation that connects these two expectations. Even though the probabilities on each side of it are purely subjective, *the relation between them is not*. The equation describes a truth that applies equally to everybody: if you want to get by in the (quantum) world, then your subjective beliefs had better connect to each other in the way that the Urgleichung says. 

(img of eqn)

The QBists often say that the Urgleichung is "normative". That means that it is not descriptive: it does not say that a person's beliefs will necessarily have that form. In fact, you are free to disobey it, and to have beliefs that don't satisfy the Urgleichung, just as you are free to walk into a casino and bet your lifes' savings on the number 7 in Roulette. The point is not that you can't do this, just that it is a bad idea and you should expect bad consequences. That's what normative means.

Nothing forces you to have beliefs in line with the Urgleichung. But if you don't, then you should expect to fail at doing anything useful with quantum systems. For most people, that wouldn't be much of a problem. Who do you know that plays high-stakes games with quantum systems on a daily basis? But there are some people who do. The thought experiment of Schrödinger's cat reminds us that in special cases, even a life can hang in the balance on quantum events. Some people have staked a lot of money on the possibility of building a quantum computer, but if their beliefs did not align with the Urgleichung, well, they'd better hope that at least their engineers' beliefs do! They shouldn't expect to make any progress otherwise.

Think of it like gambling. We all know that probabilities are supposed to add up to one. So if you're betting on a horse race, and you think the probability of Black Beauty winning is 2/3, you'd better not also think that the probability of her losing is 2/3. But let's say that you believe that anyway, for some reason. What's the problem with that? 

Well, the problem is that if you make bets on the races you will lose money. Not just in the usual sense of "losing in the long run" but in the much worse sense that there is a bet someone could offer you such that, whether Black Beauty wins or loses, you would expect to lose money in that single race. Such a bet is called a "Dutch book" and it can be used against anybody whose beliefes do not obey the rules of probability theory. When that happens, we say the person is "incoherent". 

For QBists, the Urgleichung is just that kind of rule: if you were to make bets about quantum systems, then you'd better use the Urgleichung or you would stand to lose money. Would you invest in a quantum computing startup that didn't use the Born Rule in their calculations? Well you could -- but experts in quantum theory would advise against it. 

So the Urgleichung seems to be valid for everybody who deals with quantum systems, regardless of their beliefs, and in this sense it can be thought of as an "objective" part of quantum theory. However, the jury is still out as to whether it can be abstracted away completely and instated as a feature of the world "out there", independently of us. This takes us into philosophy, which will have to wait for another post.
